# Some Questions

* What should I study in order to build the necessary academic foundation to work on this problem? I have been taking courses in I expect to complete advanced level Sanskrit, college-level Analysis and Algebra series as well as introductory probability course for Mathematics, a specialist module in Computer Science \(specifically functional programming and proving with The Coq Proof Assistant\), and programming skills in OCaml/C/C++/Python/Julia/R. I'm planning to take more courses in Mathematical Logic, Machine Learning, and theoretical CS. But I might have formed an incomplete impression of what is needed to attempt at the problem and would really appreciate your opinion on this. 
* The directions of research: One doubt is that this problem seems to be at the crossroad of many fields. We can attack the problems from different perspectives, but I could not get an accurate sense of their relative importance. Based on my limited knowledge and intuition, I see two broad directions, the probabilistic and the deterministic \(I'm aware that these terms might be inaccurate, and so please correct me if this is wrong.\) 
* From Matilde's lecture, analogy to Physics different scale lead to different research questions. The problem at hand \(i.e. implementing the Panini grammar\) appears to be on the micro or syntactic level. 
* How important is the properties peculiar to the Sanskrit Language? Are these properties significant enough to distinguish the Sanskrit language model from models for other common natural languages? In other words, how does this research problem fit into the more general NLP field? I think this is an important question because that would better situate the various research efforts in Sanskrit within the larger \(and perhaps more established\) NLP community. 
* Are there any active research programs/projects related to this topic that I can contribute to? Although I have made up my mind to commit to this endeavor, I find it difficult to find guidance and/or academic community in this area. I was wondering if I could work with you or contribute to some of your research projects, or perhaps get some advice on how to find related opportunities and resources. 

